Good afternoon.
Welcome to session 300,
Introduction to Cocoa.
And this is a kickoff to an entire
track dedicated to what I and many
others in the room believe to be the
best development platform for Mac OS X.
We've got a lot to talk about
in a short period of time.
Since this is the intro session,
we are not going to have Q&A.
We're going to run the
full length of the session,
let you get out of here.
I know for the first day,
probably some of you are
tired from your travels out,
so let's go ahead and get started.
My name is Heather Hickman.
I'm the Cocoa evangelist in the Worldwide
Developer Relations Organization,
and I by far believe I've had the
coolest job at Apple over the last year.
That is working with you, developers,
in evangelizing Cocoa.
We're going to talk a little
bit today about what Cocoa is.
For many of you,
this is going to be a bit of a review.
I know you've probably
been looking into Cocoa.
You must be under a rock if you
haven't heard what Cocoa is yet.
But, so just bear with me.
We do have a few surprises in mind
for you folk that are familiar
already with Objective-C and memory
management and Foundation and AppKit.
But my assumption is that many of
you have been so consumed in your
development efforts and bringing
your applications over from Mac OS 9
that you really haven't had a chance
to take a closer look at Cocoa.
And this week is going to be
an amazing experience for you,
so welcome.
So now a little bit about Cocoa.
I'm going to go really quickly
because we do have a lot to cover.
It's a powerful, full-featured,
easy-to-use object-oriented
development environment for Mac OS X.
And what that means is rapid
development for you as a developer
and increased productivity.
I am seeing amazing things being
done by leveraging the frameworks in
the developer community right now.
Students who are developing in Cocoa,
seeing amazing work done.
We probably all have some application on
our desktop at this time that's written
by someone under the age of 18 years old.
It's absolutely amazing.
The point I'd like to drive home today,
and I hope that you see,
is that with a little bit of effort
and a lot of creativity on your part,
I really believe you could have
the next killer application for
Mac OS X by the end of the year.
It sounds aggressive,
but some of you are probably
already leveraging the frameworks,
seeing the benefits that Cocoa provides,
and you can probably attest to this.
And I encourage each of you to talk to
other developers here at the conference
and get the point across as well.
Cocoa rocks.
Who thinks so?
Oh, anyone seen this before?
Mac OS X system architecture diagram.
You can see what Cocoa is,
peer to the other
frameworks on the system,
Java, Carbon.
So what you're going to learn today is a
little bit about what makes Cocoa unique,
what is this language called Objective-C,
what is in the Foundation and
AppKit frameworks,
and then find out a little bit more
about resources and opportunities
for you to find out more about Cocoa.
Now, if you've been looking at the
press releases about the show,
there's been an exciting announcement
as far as Cocoa development
goes and the Code Warrior tools.
And to talk more about that,
please welcome to the stage lead
technical engine—lead technical—no,
what are you?
You're a technical lead for Mac OS Tools,
Matt Henderson from MetroWorks.
Hi.
Thanks, Heather.
So I'm just going to
give you a quick demo.
Well, where's my slides?
Well, I had a slide,
but I guess I've got a demo now.
So, I hope many of you are already
familiar with CodeWarrior,
and I hope many of you are obviously
here to become familiar with Cocoa.
And we're pleased to announce
with the upcoming 8.0 release that
CodeWarrior now supports Cocoa.
We've worked very closely with
the Apple Cocoa and Interface
Builder team to achieve fairly
straightforward integration between
Interface Builder and CodeWarrior,
so you can use CodeWarrior for
your build system and Interface
Builder to build your UI.
And I have here your standard
CodeWarrior project that actually
builds a simple Cocoa demo.
And as you see,
we have the usual mainmenu.nib.
Double-click it.
It opens the new version of Interface
Builder from the April tool CD.
So just to show you
some of the integration,
we have one image here already.
And we'll go add an image
to the Code Warrior project.
and just like that,
it's in Interface Builder.
So we can...
[Transcript missing]
In regular Cocoa development,
then run it from Codeware.
And we're building the
Objective-C stuff and everything.
You know, all we fix, we have.
Well, that missed a slide.
Had the demo gone well,
it would have run.
We failed,
and I should be doing push-ups.
But nevertheless,
the point is that Cocoa and Interface
Builder have been integrated.
I'm not sure why the demo goofed up.
But try out our 8.0 release.
You'll find that there are a
lot of advantages for using
Cocoa with Code Warrior,
and it'll even further increase
your productivity above and
beyond what you do with Cocoa.
Thank you very much.
So this is what Matt was going to say.
Would you like to come up
and speak to your slides?
Yeah, come on up.
Welcome Matt up to the stage.
Okay, well, just a brief history.
We actually,
back in the early days of Rhapsody,
we added Objective-C support
to our compiler.
And it's been sort of
sitting there since then.
It was either late 1997 or early 1998.
So we haven't really
marketed Cocoa support,
even though technically we had all
the compiler fundamentals to do it.
With CodeWarrior IDE 5.0 and CodeWarrior
8 that we're releasing later this month,
we finally added long file name support.
The biggest holdup for building
Cocoa was that there were a few
header files in Cocoa that had
more than 31 character file names,
which was a limitation of old Mac OS.
So we fixed that.
And so now we can build
Cocoa without any problems.
And as I just tried to
demonstrate was IDE 5.0
integrates with Interface Builder.
And it actually does work.
And I hope you all get the
opportunity to try it out.
And the demonstration.
And then we have a number
of events during the show.
We have a MetroWorks lunch presentation
tomorrow where we're talking a
little bit about the same stuff.
We'll have a Birds of a Feather
presentation tomorrow night
where you have the opportunity to
ask us about whatever you want,
including Cocoa support.
We'll have a lot of the CodeWarrior
engineers there talking.
Open all, not open all week,
but open Tuesday and Wednesday,
we'll have a CodeWarrior lounge
where you can come and hang out.
We'll have a pool table.
And finally, there's a MetroWorks
booth in the exhibit hall.
And with that,
I'll give it back to Heather.
Thank you very much.
and all are going to
get tired of seeing me,
I'm sorry.
Next, I'd like to welcome to the stage
someone near and dear to my heart,
Mr.
Project Builder.
Can I say that?
I won't.
Forget that I said that.
Please welcome Mike Ferris.
is the, yeah, the mic is on.
Okay, great.
Hi.
So, first I want to say that it's
really great to see that CodeWarrior
is finally supporting Cocoa,
and actually, the demo was running,
it's just that IB's connection lines were
sitting on top of his running app window,
so it was working.
I look forward, actually,
to digging into the Code Warrior when
it gets released and playing around
a little bit with the Cocoa support.
So, I'm actually not here today to tell
you about how to use Project Builder
to develop Cocoa applications.
Instead, what I want to talk to you
about today is the fact that
Project Builder is a Cocoa application.
There'll be sessions later in the week,
Wednesday.
There's session 903,
Exploring Project Builder,
if you actually want to
learn how to use our tools.
Basically,
let me start by giving a little
bit of an overview of the
structure of Project Builder.
Project Builder is a pretty big system.
It's made up of several
different products.
There's the application itself.
There's probably about a half
a dozen frameworks that we use,
another 10 or 12 plug-in bundles,
various command line tools, scripts,
build system implementation scripts,
all kinds of things.
We build this with
Project Builder projects,
and there are about seven of
them that make up the entire IDE.
The reason that there are seven
is that we want to split our
projects basically along layers.
So we have a project that has
all of the lower-level stuff,
and then one that has all the UI stuff,
and so on and so forth.
This gives you an idea of the
magnitude of Project Builder.
Under 300,000 lines of
code in Project Builder.
The reason that there are under 300,000
lines of code in Project Builder is
because most of the code is in Cocoa.
And that's really the point of
what I want to say to you today,
is that we are able to go as quickly
with Project Builder in terms of
adding new features and really moving
it forward because we get to leverage
all the stuff that is in Cocoa.
So, the title of this slide is
meant to bring to your minds
a couple of different quotes.
There's, you know,
on the subject of leverage, Archimedes,
who said, give me a place to stand
and I can move the world.
And Sir Isaac Newton said,
if I've seen farther than others,
it's because I'm standing
on the shoulders of giants.
Now, actually, Brian Reed once said,
in computer science,
we stand on each other's feet.
And I think that Cocoa actually
provides an exception to that rule.
Cocoa is a giant,
and you can stand on its shoulders.
These are a few of the classes
in Project Builder that we
actually use a lot in... Sorry,
a few of the classes in Cocoa that
we use a lot in Project Builder.
Not just use,
but we actually subclass and extend
these things in significant ways.
You know, we use window controllers
all over the place.
We use the document system both
for project documents and for file
documents for the file editor.
We use the text system
for our code editing.
You know,
we've added things like syntax coloring,
auto-indentation,
all kinds of things fairly
easily to the Cocoa text system.
We have a lot of extensions
to the tables and outlines.
We use split views.
In fact,
that sliding tab thing in Project Builder
is actually a subclass of NS Split View.
We make a lot of use of the property
list stuff and key value coding and
other foundation facilities in Cocoa.
So I guess the main point here is
that we feel that we get a lot of
leverage out of being on top of Cocoa.
I've been doing Cocoa programming
for about 13 or 14 years now,
and I'm not sure that I would
do programming at this point
if I couldn't do it in Cocoa.
So, that's really all I wanted to say.
Oh, you know what?
Actually,
there's one more thing I wanted to say.
We do have several sessions if you do
want to learn about Project Builder.
There's a 903 Exploring Project Builder.
There's also 908,
which is a more advanced talk that
focuses on delivery of your products.
And then, actually,
a related thing is AppleScript Studio.
AppleScript Studio is very
related to Project Builder,
and Interface Builder is
also very related to Cocoa.
And if you haven't looked at it at all,
I'd really urge you to go see this
presentation because it's really cool.
So Project Builder is an example of a
Cocoa application built specifically
for you guys to develop in Cocoa.
I thought it'd also be cool to have
representation here from one of our
engineering teams who actually develops
applications for our customers.
And this is one of the coolest
applications on the system today.
I'd like you to please welcome
someone who graciously accepted
to come and talk about their
Cocoa development experiences,
Senior Director of New Media Engineering,
Freddie Geier.
Thanks for the introduction, Heather.
And as you can hear,
I am not a native English speaker,
so excuse my really bad English accent.
Let me share with you just a few words on
the experience we made with Cocoa so far.
After finishing iDVD1 in February 2001,
the DVD engineering team, by the way,
all traditional Macintosh
developers at that time,
reconceived their future development
plans for the next major product releases
on 10 for iDVD and DVD Studio Pro.
And as a matter of fact, first of all,
we thought carbonizing
might be the simplest way.
But on the other hand,
we had the feeling that this
approach might be not the right
way to go if you want to develop
a future-oriented application.
So we decided to survey an alternative.
Of course, which is objective-oriented
programming in Cocoa.
After two weeks of critical
investigations and believe me,
hours and hours and sometimes nights
of discussions how to proceed,
it was clear to us that we
don't want to compromise.
We took the challenge to learn a new
language and started the development of
our new project in the Cocoa environment.
Only after seven months,
we released iDVD,
and hopefully you agree the
app is truly succeeding.
Living now with Cocoa for
more than a year,
we are still convinced
that shifting into,
for us, a new development model was
a really smart decision.
Today, on daily purpose,
we take benefit of the dynamic binding,
of much better memory management,
event modeling, app kit,
and other just native OS X capabilities.
So my advice to you, go with Cocoa.
Thanks.
and Matt Lange,
and I'm going to introduce
you to the Cocoa APIs.
So,
something else that I've done over the
past year as Cocoa evangelist is be list
mom to the Cocoa Dev discussion lists.
And I don't know how many
of you subscribe and post,
but oftentimes,
when I see something interesting come up,
I would just email the
person back off the list,
of course,
and ask for or solicit more feedback.
And something I've heard over and
over again from Cocoa developers
[Transcript missing]
So I'd like to welcome to the stage
now Adrian Baerlocher from the
QuickTime engineering team to speak
about QuickTime and Cocoa development.
Hi,
so I'm actually going to talk a little
bit about QuickTime Broadcaster.
This is a new application we're
working on that lets you broadcast live
events using Mac OS X and a DV camera.
You can try it out for yourself.
It comes installed with Jaguar Server.
It's one of the CDs you'll
receive here this week,
or I guess two of the
CDs you'll receive here.
So QuickTime Broadcaster is a
Cocoa application that uses many
different components in QuickTime.
Including the sequence grabber,
standard compression, and broadcast APIs.
We basically writ a set of
Objective-C classes that sits on
top of these QuickTime components.
As you can see from the screenshot,
we're not using any of QuickTime's
Carbon modal dialogues.
They're all native
Cocoa NS controls and views.
And one of the great benefits of using
Cocoa is that we were able to prototype
many different user interfaces.
For this app alone,
we probably did like half a dozen.
And most of them were functional.
And I can speak from personal experience
that Cocoa is very easy to learn
because basically six months ago,
I didn't know Cocoa.
And I learned it in that time
and wrote this application.
So it's a lot of fun.
The classes are very consistent.
The framework's very easy to extend.
And the QuickTime team is
very excited about Cocoa.
If you'd like to learn more about
QuickTime and QuickTime in Cocoa,
here's a few great sessions to consider.
The State of QuickTime in 2002
is an overview of QuickTime over
the past 10 years and where
we're heading in the future.
Building QuickTime-savvy
apps discusses how to add
QuickTime to your applications,
whether they be Cocoa or Carbon.
Finally, if you want hands-on with
a QuickTime engineer,
there are hands-on
sessions Tuesday to Friday,
1 to 4.
These are great.
You can bring your source code,
your applications,
and sit down with QuickTime engineers.
I'll be there all of
Thursday afternoon from 1 to 4.
If you have any QuickTime and
Cocoa questions,
I'd be happy to answer them.
Thanks.
Hopefully having Adrian join
us is a sign of things to come.
I welcome your feedback.
If you would send it to me,
my contact information will
be on the screen a bit later,
specific to Cocoa and
QuickTime development.
Now, I hope you enjoyed that
parade of engineers talking
about Cocoa development.
It was my intent just to
have you realize that,
in many instances,
learning Objective-C and how to
leverage the frameworks can be
done in a short period of time.
And it does take that time to get
used to the idea of object-oriented
programming and some of the classes that
are available to you in the frameworks.
But after you've got that down,
you can move pretty quickly to do some
pretty amazing things on the system.
So now to share more information,
more of that "What is Objective-C?
What are these frameworks?" and I'll
come back and visit you a bit later,
please welcome to the
stage Cocoa DTS engineer,
Matt Formica.
Thanks, Heather.
So as Heather said,
my name is Matthew Formica.
I work in developer relations.
I support Cocoa,
as well as development tools.
And if what we've seen so far
today is perhaps the dessert
portion of the presentation,
now we'll get into some of the dinner,
and then maybe we'll come back
for some dessert at the end.
So let's dive right in.
So,
some of you may be sitting here today and
you heard a little bit about Cocoa today,
as well as having perhaps
heard about Cocoa elsewhere,
and you may be thinking, why
Is Cocoa going to be overly simplistic?
Is it going to be like perhaps other
frameworks that maybe lock you into
one way of doing things or force
me to do things in a certain way?
On the other hand,
some of you may be sitting
here today thinking,
I've used other frameworks,
and they all promise to
reduce complexity in code,
but I still find myself initializing
line after line of this class,
or that part of the framework,
or that object,
or hooking up these widgets.
Isn't Cocoa going to be like that?
Well, thankfully, I'm here today to tell
you that it's neither.
Cocoa is certainly full-featured.
This is, in fact, the class hierarchy,
and if you can read any of
the class names on there,
you have better eyes than I do.
Cocoa provides all the classes
and hooks and callbacks you
might need to customize things.
But the nice thing is that, in general,
you don't need to actually interact
with most of these classes.
They just do their job
while you do your job.
This is the Cocoa class hierarchy as
you might think about it in your head.
It actually consists
of two core frameworks:
Foundation and AppKit.
On the left, we have Foundation,
which includes NSObject,
which is the root object of
the Cocoa class hierarchy.
and foundation consists of
what we generally think of as
the non-GUI portion of Cocoa.
It includes such things as
classes for dealing with values,
collections, and strings,
as well as classes for
scripting and accessibility and
working with the file system.
[Transcript missing]
The areas that are circled in red are the
ones we'll actually focus in on today.
Strings, collections,
and OS services from Foundation,
and user interface, text,
and graphics from AppKit.
But first,
we have to deal with the question,
which language to use.
So the Cocoa APIs themselves are
actually provided in two languages,
Objective-C and Java.
Objective-C is a dynamic,
highly object-oriented language that's
time-tested technology and today is a
part of the Free Software Foundation's
standard GCC compiler distribution.
Java is similar to Objective-C in
its dynamic nature,
and so Apple provides what's
known as the Java Bridge,
Java interfaces to the
native Objective-C APIs.
One of the nice things about
Objective-C is that it's a mere
small superset of standard ANSI C.
So you can take advantage of
your existing C knowledge,
as well as leverage existing C++ code
you may have in your Cocoa programs,
while taking advantage of Objective-C,
where it really counts
when using the native APIs.
So the question still remains,
which language to use?
And the answer is really,
use the language that fits your needs.
If there are critical Java libraries
that you want to interface with,
or you have an existing
back-end Java engine that you
want to take advantage of,
you may find that programming
Cocoa in Java is the way to go.
On the other hand,
developers who don't have these
requirements typically find that the
lower runtime overhead and faster
performance of Objective-C may
get the language of choice.
Apple supports both Objective-C and
Java for Cocoa development.
But we'll focus in on Objective-C today,
and I'd like to take you on a
brief walkthrough of the language.
I find, when talking with developers,
that many of them feel like
when they're first starting with
Cocoa and learning Objective-C,
that they're concerned about a
ramp-up time to learn the language.
It turns out that most developers can
learn the language in only a few days.
That's because it's a small
superset of standard ANSI C,
with some additional syntax to
handle the dynamic object runtime.
They often find when they're first
starting that they think they have
to do everything in a special,
objective C way,
when actually the standard C way of doing
things is often the right way to go.
So the really unique thing about
Objective-C is that it's a dynamic,
has a dynamic runtime.
And it actually takes advantage
of weak typing as well.
And this allows you to write
powerful callbacks and handlers that
take objects of generic type ID to
refer to an object of any class.
Then, using introspection,
another feature of the language,
we can actually query those objects
at runtime to determine what
their capabilities are and make
decisions based on that information.
Here's what you've all been waiting for,
the unique Objective-C syntax.
It starts with a left bracket,
and then the object that we're
going to send a message to,
and then the message name,
followed by a closing
bracket and a semicolon.
So in this case, my object is the object
we're sending a message to,
and do something is the
message we're going to send.
So what's really going on here?
Well, it's actually a message being sent,
not a function being called.
At runtime,
the object will receive this message
and then decide which method to perform.
It's almost like all methods are virtual.
However,
the information is actually cached by
the system as well for performance.
Here's a couple more
examples of parameters.
So in the first case,
we're passing one parameter, other obj,
to the do with this colon message.
So note that messages that include
parameters end with colons.
So the complete message is,
do with this colon.
It takes one parameter, other obj,
and the message is
being sent to my object.
In the second example,
we actually have two parameters,
and this can easily be
extended to n parameters.
And the interesting thing to note
here is that we actually intersperse
the message name with the parameters.
So do with this colon and this
colon is the complete message name.
This can very much help make
your code more readable.
Never again do you have to look at a
function call with 10 comma-separated
numbers and sit there wondering what
each number refers to or trying to
match the prototype with the invocation.
Another thing to note here
is the standard naming
conventions for Cocoa methods.
Note that the first
word is not capitalized,
but each word thereafter in the
message name is capitalized.
So, do with this colon and do with
this and this colon are what's
actually known as selectors.
They are messages
independent of any class,
which you can actually send to any class.
And often you will need to
construct selectors when working in
Objective-C and Cocoa for callbacks.
Here's what the class
definition looks like.
Note the pound import on the first line.
Objective-C does support the standard
#include directive used in C,
but it has this additional
include directive as well,
which is what's typically used.
And what it actually means is the same
thing as a #include with an implicit
#pragma once to tell the compiler that
each header should only be included once.
After that,
the class definition itself starts with
an at-interface and ends with an at-end.
After the at interface
comes the class name,
then a colon, and then the class that
we're subclassing from.
So in this case,
my class is our class name,
and we're subclassing from NSObject.
After that comes an opening
curly brace and any instance
variables that we're declaring.
Note that we always declare
pointers to Objective-C objects.
We end with an ending curly brace
and follow this with any methods
that we may have for this class.
And with something that may
look curious to you if you
don't already know Objective-C,
is the leading plus sign or minus
sign in front of each method.
This indicates whether the method is
a class method or an instance method,
respectively.
After the plus or minus sign comes
the return type in parentheses,
and then the method name
along with any parameters.
Here's the class implementation.
Begins with an at implementation
and ends with an at end.
There's a couple things
I want to point out here.
First,
note that in the do-something method,
we're sending messages to two objects we
haven't talked about up to this point,
namely self and super.
Self allows us to refer to ourselves
within a method implementation,
basically like Java's this object.
Super, on the other hand,
allows us to refer to a superclass's
implementation of a method we've
overridden when we want to take
advantage of default functionality.
This is very handy sometimes when you
want to take advantage of the standard
way of doing things and then add some
little bit of delta functionality.
The other big point to note here
is that you actually don't have to
declare methods in the class definition
to go ahead and implement them.
Objective C doesn't suffer from
the fragile base class problem
to the same degree that C++ does,
so we can present a clean interface
for the class to users of the class,
and then go ahead and implement
any additional methods that
we need on the back end.
So that actually covers
the basics of the language,
the real foundation of it all.
But there are two other concepts
which are not quite as foundational,
but which we still encounter
on a frequent basis when
developing an Objective-C.
And I don't have time to go into
examples on them here today,
but I did want to touch on them briefly.
The first item is categories.
Now, categories actually allow you to
add methods to existing classes.
Now,
that may not sound like anything special,
but it's the way that we
do this that's really cool,
because you can actually add these
new methods in your category in
a different source file than the
original implementation of the class.
In fact,
you don't have to have the source
code to the original class at all
to write a category on that class.
As long as you have
symbols to link against,
you're good to go.
Now, you can add instance variables
to a class with a category,
but you can take advantage of
existing instance variables
in your category methods.
And the neat thing is, at runtime,
these methods are just as much
a part of the class as any
other method on the class is.
So all your subclasses get to
take advantage of these as well.
Categories are used very often in Cocoa.
In fact, many of the methods
you'll use every day are,
in fact, implemented as categories
in the frameworks.
But why might you want to write
a category in your application?
Well,
just think for a moment that you want to
add a new string manipulation routine to,
say, NSString.
One way you could do this would
be to write a new function that
takes an NSString as a parameter.
But perhaps the more object-oriented
way to do it would be to actually
write a category on NSString where
you add your new method.
Then, all your NSStrings automatically
get this behavior,
as well as your subclasses.
Protocols are the other concept
we want to talk about here today.
Protocols allow you to declare
methods not associated with a class,
but which a class or classes can choose
to implement to conform to the protocol,
similar to Java's interfaces.
If you claim to conform
to a protocol and don't,
you'll actually get an
error at compile time.
So what are protocols good for?
Well, protocols allow you to group
objects by functionality when
functionality and not class hierarchy
is all you really care about.
So, for example,
you could combine this with weak
typing to have a parameter to a
method be declared as type ID,
that is, an object of any type.
But have it conform to a specific
protocol to ensure that certain
functionality is present at runtime.
And then there's this kind
of thing in the middle that
we call informal protocols.
And they're categories, really.
There's no compiler error if you don't
conform to these informal protocols,
but they do help group functionality.
There's actually a Cocoa technique
session later on this week where
they'll go into this in more detail.
And that's actually the
basics of the language.
And hopefully if you squint a little bit,
you'll be able to follow along
with the Objective-C on the slides.
But now I'd like to turn from the
language Objective-C to the frameworks,
Foundation and AppKit,
and I'll start with a
discussion of Foundation.
As I've said earlier,
Foundation is actually what
we think of as typically the
non-GUI portion of Cocoa.
And there are five things
I'd like to talk about in
relation to Foundation today.
I'm going to talk about NSObject,
which is the root object of
the Cocoa class hierarchy.
I'm going to talk about something that
every application developer will need to
deal with when working in Objective-C,
which is memory management.
Then I'm going to dive down into
a few case studies of specific
classes that you'll either use on
a frequent basis or bump into from
time to time when using Foundation.
So first, NSObject.
NSObject provides base functionality
that just about every other class
in Cocoa will take advantage of.
It helps bootstrap your objects
and get them up and running.
In fact, in Objective-C,
there's no specific syntax
for working with constructors,
but NSObject does define
two methods to help here,
alloc and init.
Alec allocates memory for a new
instance of an object at runtime,
while Init initializes that
object to default values.
In your subclasses,
typically you won't override ALEC,
but you will either override INIT,
write a more complex initializer
like INIT with FUBAR,
or both.
Typically, the initializer that takes the
most parameters is what's known
as the default initializer.
And this object also provides some
introspection capabilities for Cocoa.
Methods like responds to selector,
where you can actually ask an
object at runtime if it knows how
to deal with a certain message.
And finally,
NSObject has capabilities for
asking objects what their class is,
or for a string description
of the contents of an object.
This can be handy for debugging,
among other things.
When it comes to memory management,
Cocoa and Objective-C use
reference counting.
There are three main messages that
you'll want to pay attention to.
Retain adds a reference to an object.
Release decrements it,
and auto-release decrements it later,
for some definition of later.
And the rules are really quite simple.
By convention, only creation methods like
ALEC return retained objects,
that is,
objects with a retained count of one.
You can assume that all other
methods will return objects
that have not been retained.
If you want the object to stick around,
you need to retain it.
On the other hand,
when you're done with an object,
you should call release
to avoid leaking memory.
When there are no more
references to an object,
that is,
when its retain count drops to zero,
the object will be
automatically deallocated.
Here's a few examples.
In the first line,
you can see that we nest a call to
Alec with a call to init with format.
The alloc call gives us a new instance
in memory of an NSString object,
which gets passed right
along to initWithFormat,
which gives it some default values.
initWithFormat returns the
same new NSString object,
which gets assigned to myString.
So myString now has a retain count of 1.
We then log out to standard out
myString using the NSLOG function.
And finally,
to avoid memory leaking myString,
we send it the release message,
deallocating the object.
So let's turn from memory management
to an example of one of the value
classes that Foundation provides.
This class is NSString.
It's an opaque string class.
It's used pretty much everywhere
in the Cocoa frameworks.
And one of its coolest features
is that it provides what's known
as toll-free bridging to core
foundations CFStringRef type.
That means that these objects are
actually identical at runtime.
You can directly cast
from a CFStringRef to an
NSString and vice versa,
and pass them to methods
that take one or the other.
NSString also provides lots of
string manipulation routines
for your convenience and
is fully Unicode compliant.
In your code,
you'll want to use the at-quote construct
to refer to a constant NSString,
very similar to
Core Foundation's CFSTR macro.
And finally, like many of the other
classes in Foundation,
there's actually a mutable or
changeable version of NSString,
NSMutableString,
that you'll want to use if you're
changing the string as you go.
This division between mutable
and immutable was made to allow
for optimizations to be done on
the immutable version that would
not have otherwise been possible.
Here's some NSString examples.
Some string is first
assigned to the string world!
using the @quote construct.
Then, we print out this string,
along with some additional text,
using NSLog,
and its built-in printf-style
format specifiers.
%at refers to an NSString.
And finally,
we print out some more text on the
length of the string using NSLOG and
asking the string for its length.
NSArray is an example of one of the
collection classes that Cocoa provides.
And NSArray provides optimized
expanding array support.
And in addition,
it's actually quite fast.
It'll switch implementations on the fly
at runtime based on your usage patterns.
Some may see the fact that
NSArray only takes NSObject
subclasses as a limitation.
But besides the fact that you can
wrap base types in value classes,
one of NSArray's advantages is that you
can have objects of any NSObject subclass
all contained in the same NSArray.
This can actually be quite powerful,
because you can use, for example,
an NSEnumerator and an NSArray to
iterate through an NSArray that contains
objects of lots of different classes,
and then call the same
message on each object.
The other nice thing about
NSArrays is they too provide
various manipulation routines.
For example,
combining arrays or comparing arrays.
And NSArrays retain the objects that you
add to them so that you don't have to.
And finally, like NSString,
you'll want to use the
mutable version of NSArray,
NSMutableArray,
if you're changing the array as you go.
And thirdly,
we come to an example of one of the
OS services that Foundation provides.
And this class is NSTask.
It allows you to launch other
processes to do work for you.
And then you can interact
with them via Standard In,
Standard Out, and Standard Air,
and the NSPipe class.
NSTask is commonly used to
wrap command-line tools or
shell scripts in a Cocoa GUI.
And often what you'll do is take your
favorite command line application
and put a Cocoa interface on it
to increase its user-friendliness.
And this can be, at times,
the fastest way to port or
get an application up and
running on the platform.
Let's take a look at how
you might set up an NS task.
First, you can see that we're calling
alloc and init to create a new
instance of an NS task and then
initialize it to default values.
Then, we send it the set launch path
message to actually tell it what
application we want it to launch.
And after this,
we tell it what arguments we
want to pass to this task,
and those arguments are
contained in an NSArray.
Here we're passing just
a couple of flags to LS,
as well as the director we want to list.
Finally,
we allocate and init a new NSPipe object
and set it to be the standard output of
the task so that we can get the results,
and then we launch the task.
So that's a quick flyby of Foundation.
There's obviously a lot more there,
but there are lots of other sessions
this week where you can find out more.
I want to turn now to AppKit,
which is the GUI portion of Cocoa.
And once again, there's five things
I'd like to talk about.
The first is Model-View-Controller,
often abbreviated MVC,
which is a standard design
pattern leveraged by Cocoa.
Then, I'd like to talk a little bit
about some of the application-level
services that AppKit provides for you.
And we'll mention briefly the
text and drawing subsystems.
And finally, we'll get to a discussion of
the event system in Cocoa,
controls, and conclude with a brief demo.
So, you don't actually have to
use Model-View-Controller
in your applications,
but it does really help and
is leveraged by Cocoa to help
break up your application into
the parts that do the work,
the parts that display the results,
and the parts that
interact between the two.
So the model is the first part.
This is where your
back-end data is stored,
and this is the part that actually
gets the job done in your application.
Typically,
in a cross-platform application,
the model is the part that goes most
easily from platform to platform.
And the view part of your application
is actually the antithesis of this.
These are the buttons and widgets and
sliders that the user interacts with.
But the view parts of your application
don't actually need to know very
much about how to store the data
or how to operate on the data.
And then there's the controller
part of your application.
This is the part that
talks between the two.
It serves up data from
the model and displays it,
hands it off to the view,
and then it parses responses
from the user in the view and
hands them off to the model.
This can help enhance code factorization,
encapsulization,
and reuse in your applications.
We'll come back to some examples
of Model-View-Controller
in action in a little bit.
So, when it comes to handling
application-level services,
you actually want to use NSApplication,
of all things.
And you'll interact with NSApplication
through the global NSApp object
defined for you in your applications.
NSApp does a lot of work for you.
It will actually,
upon application launch,
set up the menu bar, load the main nib,
which is your application's
user interface file,
handle the dock menu,
and lots more for you.
So you'll want to message NSApp when
you want to do application-level tasks.
For example, you can ask NSApp if your
application is hidden.
Or, on the other hand,
you could set your application's
icon image in the dock to
provide feedback to the user.
Beyond NS application, however,
AppKit provides a slew of functionality
in a lot of different classes.
And we don't have time to go
into all the gory details today.
But I did want to touch briefly
upon perhaps what is a whole
solar system of classes in AppKit,
which is the Cocoa Tech System.
The nice thing is that most
developers never have to see or
work with all these classes because
they're wrapped up in one complete
international drag-and-drop widget,
NSTextView.
NS TextView does a ton of
stuff right out of the box.
Whether it's fonts, images,
spell-checking, the kitchen sink,
you name it, it's pretty much in there
in some sort of standard,
reasonable,
default behavior right out of the box.
But it is a front-end for a bunch
of interlocking text classes,
and so you can do things like syntax
highlighting or some of the other things
that Project Builder takes advantage of.
You can write a complete word
processor using the Cocoa text system.
There's a session later
this week on Cocoa Text,
which I encourage you to go pay
attention to if you're interested.
and turning from text to drawing,
in addition to a complete
NS view drawing architecture,
there are drawing methods scattered
throughout the Cocoa class hierarchy.
Furthermore,
core graphics calls can also be used,
and there's a Cocoa drawing
session specifically to talk
about these later this week.
So now we come to the Cocoa Event System.
When it comes to events in Cocoa,
NSApplication will handle
your event loop for you.
This is actually very similar
to how runApplication event
loop does on the Carbon side.
So how does this work?
So, you have a GUI application.
You have a window on the
screen with some widgets in it,
say, a text field, a button, a slider.
And at runtime,
one of those widgets will be determined
to be what's called the first responder.
That is, as NS events get handled and
come in through the system,
The first responder is the widget
that will get the first chance
to respond to those events.
So, oftentimes, perhaps,
the text field in your window
will be the first responder,
so that key press events
will go to that text field.
However, as your application is running,
the first responder can and will
change on the fly automatically.
Say, for instance, the user clicks on a
different text field.
Well, that new text field will then
become the first responder,
so that all key press events
will now go to that text field.
So what if a particular widget doesn't
know how to respond to a given event?
Well, if this happens,
the event is actually sent up the
responder chain until an object is
found that responds to the event.
This is actually quite powerful.
In fact, the first responder and the
responder chain are powerful not
only because they're very dynamic,
but because of a couple
of other paradigms,
namely target action and
targeting the first responder,
which allow the responder chain to
actually dynamically reconfigure itself
on the fly based on user interaction.
So, to understand how this works,
we first have to talk about
controls and target action,
and then we'll come back to
talking about the first responder.
Controls and other related classes
typically have two key parts.
They have an action and a target.
The action is the message
that will be sent when the
control is actually triggered.
Meanwhile,
the target is the object to which
that action message will be sent.
Take NSButton, for example.
You could, for example,
have an NSButton in your application
wired up to some code you have that,
say, is a document that knows
how to print itself.
Thus, when you press that button,
it can send the print action
message to the document target.
NS Menu Items work this way as well.
When you select a menu item
in a Cocoa application,
it will actually send an action
message to a given target
that it's been wired up to.
This is a key point.
These action messages and targets are
actually wired up in Interface Builder.
There's no code that you need to write
to hook up your widgets to each other.
I'll demo this shortly.
So if that's what controls are,
let's come back to the first responder.
So we've talked about target inaction,
but the target can actually
be determined on the fly.
And this can happen if you
hook up the target in Interface
Builder to be the first responder.
Then the action message will be sent to
whoever the first responder happens to
be at a given point in your application.
This is actually quite powerful.
Cut, copy, and paste work this way
in Cocoa applications.
They actually will send the cut, copy,
or paste action message
to the first responder,
whatever widget that
happens to be at that point.
So if this text field
is the first responder,
cut, copy, and paste will operate on it.
If a different one is
the first responder,
cut, copy,
and paste will operate on that one.
But what if the first responder
is something that doesn't
know how to respond at cut,
copy, and paste?
Well, this is handled for you
automatically as well.
If you recall,
we talked about introspection
capabilities a little bit earlier.
Well,
menu items can actually auto-enable and
disable themselves on the fly at runtime.
If a given first responder doesn't know
how to respond to a given action message,
Cut, Copy, and Paste will automatically
realize that and disable themselves.
So now we'll move on from the event
system to something that's perhaps a
more sophisticated widget in Cocoa,
and that is NS TableView,
something similar to
Carbon's data browser.
NS Table View is actually a view in
the Model View Controller paradigm.
So it doesn't store any of
the data that it displays.
That's up to you.
You need to write an object that
conforms to the NS Table data
source informal protocol.
You write the model.
And this is really handy.
This is a really handy separation because
the table view doesn't have to know
anything about what your data looks like,
really.
And you, on the other hand,
don't really have to know
how to draw a table view.
You just write the part
that you can do best.
So, what's this about writing an
NS table data source protocol?
How many methods do we have to
implement to get this to work?
Well,
if you just have a display-only table,
there's only two methods to deal with.
Number of rows in table
view is the first method,
and you basically just have to respond
with how many rows this table has.
The second method is table view
object value for table column row.
And this actually gives
you a column in row,
and you need to take a look at your
model and respond with whatever
data should go in a particular cell
in the table view to be displayed.
That's all well and good if
you have a display-only table.
But if you want the user to actually
be able to enter data in your table,
you've got to do more.
How much more?
Only one more method.
This method is table view set
object value for table column row,
where given an object
value in a column in a row,
you get a chance to stuff
this back into your model.
But how does the table view
actually know whether you've
implemented this method or not?
Well, once again, it uses introspection.
It will actually query
your object at runtime,
ask it if it implements this method,
and if it does, it will be called.
If not, it won't,
and the table view will automatically
enable or disable user editing based
on whether you have this method.
So now to demo in this table view
on some of the other concepts
we've talked about today,
I'd like to invite Heather Hickman
to come back on stage to
help me with a brief demo.
This demo is called MP3 Player.
It's a small little Cocoa app,
only about 50 lines of code,
that actually calls
through to an NS task.
That's actually executing MPG-123,
an open-source MP3 player
that you can download for
yourself off of freshmeat.net.
So let's open the
Project Builder project.
What we'll do first is
take a look at the Nib,
which is this app's user interface file,
and see what the interface
looks like for MP3 player.
There's two main parts
of the interface here.
First of all, we have a basic window.
Inside the window,
we have a table view where we actually
display MP3s that we've dragged in.
This table view is actually
a custom table view subclass
that knows how to play MP3s.
The other user-interface element
we have here is a basic menu bar.
It has all the standard menu
elements we might expect.
So if that's the interface,
let's go run the app and
see how it works right now.
So, right out of the box, we get a lot of
Cocoa functionality for free.
The window just easily
knows how to resize itself.
Oops, there's a button over there.
I know.
And... I didn't see that.
menus just work.
We even get a default about
box that pulls information out
of the application to display.
But we're not really interested
in the user interface.
We're writing the
application to play music.
So let's drag in some MP3s.
So it just parses that,
drops them off on the table,
and then to play one,
we can just double-click on it.
You'll notice that actually we are
calling through to MPG-123 because the
console in the back gives us standard
out and displays the MPG-123 output.
Okay, so let's take a look at a
little bit of the code here.
First of all,
we'll take a look at My Controller.
And this class is actually,
for such a small app,
a combination of the
model and the controller.
And there's a few lines
I want to take a look at.
First of all is this
set double action line.
Our table view is represented in
our code by the song table object.
And what we're doing here
is telling it that when we
double-click a particular row,
we want it to call the play song method
to actually start playing an MP3.
The other thing we'll look at here
in the code are the two NS table
data source protocol methods
that we need to power this table.
The first one is number
of rows in table view.
And we can see here that we store our
MP3s in a basic NSArray called songs.
And so to find out how many rows
this table view should have,
we just call count.
In the second method,
we have TableView object
value for table column row.
A long name,
but hopefully it makes the code
easier to read down the road.
And here, it's quite simple as well.
Given a particular column and row,
we would just return the appropriate
item from our songs array.
So if that's what's driving the array,
what's actually playing the songs?
Well,
it's the MyTableView table view subclass.
There's two methods here,
playSong and stopPlaying.
First thing we do is we ask if we
actually are already playing a song,
because we don't want to have two
songs playing at the same time.
We tell the song to stop playing.
After that, we have some code to actually
calculate a path inside our application
package that points to MPG123.
Then we alloc and init
a new NSTask object,
set its launch path to be the MP3 player,
and then set whatever arguments we want.
In this case,
just a path to the MP3 we want to play.
After doing a little more initialization,
we launch the task, playing the song.
Stop playing is actually even easier.
If we're actually playing a song,
we just terminate the task and then
release it to avoid leaking memory.
So that's the real core guts of the code
that's actually playing the music here.
But there's a flaw in our user interface.
What if we get a telephone
call and need to stop the song?
Well, we actually can't do that
in our interface here,
short of quitting the application.
Wouldn't it be nice if we actually
had a button in the window that we
could press to stop playing the song,
and another button to
start playing songs?
Well,
Interface Builder will help us with that.
Interface Builder provides a complete
palette set for all the different
widgets that Cocoa provides,
everything from buttons and
sliders to drawers and text views.
But what we want are buttons.
So, we'll drag in a couple of buttons.
Notice as we drag them in,
these blue lines showing up in our view.
These are the Aqua guidelines.
It's Interface Builder helping you
write your applications in conformance
with the Aqua interface guidelines.
Now that we have both buttons in place,
we'll change one of them to say
"play" and the other to say "stop."
So that's great,
but changing text on buttons doesn't
actually build in functionality.
To do that,
we need to wire up these controls
to their targets and actions.
So what's involved there?
Well, it basically just involves control
dragging from the widget to the target.
Our target in this case is the table
view that knows how to play songs,
and the action method we're
going to hook up play to is
the play song action method.
Then we'll hook up the stop
playing button to the stop
playing action message.
will then save this in Interface Builder,
go back to Project Builder,
and rebuild the project.
Okay, we'll drag in some songs again.
And we now find that we can actually
play them by hitting the play button.
We can stop playing them
by hitting the stop button.
Thanks, Heather.
Did you get all that?
So for those of you that
are brand new to Cocoa,
I wanted to take this opportunity to
let you know that some time next week,
on the ADC site,
a little bit earlier in the conference,
in fact yesterday,
we had an introduction to
Cocoa Early Bird session,
which is a four hour hands on session
that's very interactive and you're able
to begin an application and actually
have that evolve within the four hours.
And what we did is we
videoed that session.
We are doing some post
production work on it.
We're going to divide it into four
segments and we're going to re-deliver
it streaming off of the ADC site next
week along with the files and the
exercises included in the session.
So you will receive an email through
your ADC membership to let you know when
that's available and we're interested
in seeing your feedback on that.
So if you didn't catch it all here today,
it's okay.
Now that being said, documentation,
documentation, documentation.
This is another topic that I've heard
a lot about as the Cocoa evangelist.
And I can understand that
documentation makes it a lot
easier for you to do your job.
We've got some exciting
announcements here today.
I'd like to welcome to the stage,
manager in the Cocoa Tech Pubs group,
Matt Rollefsson.
Thank you, Heather.
So I wanted to just say a few
words about documentation because,
as we all know,
sessions like this are great for
giving you an overview and giving
you an idea of how things work,
which is essential to understanding
how to use the technology.
But when you get down to brass tacks
and have to actually write code,
you need to know what it looks like,
exactly what every method does,
and how to call it.
Oops.
Except it goes backwards.
So the first thing I wanted to say is
that there is a lot of content for you.
We've got a lot of documentation,
chips on the system.
It's accessible for you
directly on your system.
If you don't have a
connection to the Internet,
you can still look at your documentation.
As of the developer tools CD,
so the April developers tools
CD that you received today,
we are in fact reference
API complete for Mac OS X 10.1.
So, no more description forthcomings
in the reference API.
We will be working hard over the
coming weeks to make that true
for the Jaguar release as well.
On the seed, you'll find that there are
some description forthcomings
that are back as the engineers
have been introducing new API.
A lot of the stuff has been documented
in the official documentation.
Also, there are release notes about
much of the new information.
Rest assured,
by the time Jaguar actually ships,
we will include all of the new APIs as
part of the documentation in the
developer tools that ships with Jaguar.
There's also a good deal of conceptual
material that's available from
the website and also on your CD as
part of the programming topics.
It is not complete,
but there's a lot there.
It gives you good orientation
to how the system is designed,
how it's meant to be used.
And the good news there is that
we're constantly working on that,
and there's more on the way.
So we'll be going through
that conceptual material,
expanding it,
putting out a lot more material for you,
and your feedback is
definitely appreciated.
If there are specific areas
that you found the material that
we have out there is not quite
sufficient to get your job done,
please let us know at the TechPubs
feedback session later this week
or by email so that we can best
understand how to focus our efforts
to help you get your job done.
As I said,
documentation does ship on your system.
So to make it more accessible to you and
make it easier to use the documentation,
we've integrated it with Project Builder.
And the documentation,
when you do a definition
search in Project Builder,
if there's documentation available,
there's a little book icon that shows up.
Click on that book icon,
and you have access to the doc right
there from within Project Builder.
Without having to switch
around to some other system,
having to go out to a browser on the web,
or go to some other application,
you can access your
documentation directly.
You can also get to documentation
from Project Builder's class browser.
And with Jaguar,
the Project Builder team has
introduced the ability to do general
text searches of the documentation.
So you can look through... Search through
the conceptual material right on your
system without leaving Project Builder.
So, that's pretty much what
we've got in Mac OS X.
Yes, Heather?
Heather Not so soon.
So, pardon me.
I'm going to take this opportunity to
ask Raleigh about something that I've
been hearing about over the last year,
specific to documentation.
And what's happened with all
that feedback about printed
API reference for Cocoa?
Matt Printed API reference?
Heather Printed API reference, yeah.
Matt Do you have any idea how many pages,
how many thousands of pages that is?
Heather
Yeah, but, I mean,
and I know the work that
you've been doing in the,
you know, getting rid of the
description forthcomings,
that's a great thing, right?
That's an amazing thing.
But in addition to that,
developers like printed API reference.
They like to be able to highlight things.
They like to be able to dog-ear things.
They like that.
You're sure?
I'm positive.
It doesn't just take up space on
your desk and accumulate dust.
Well, it does.
It does.
It takes up quite a bit
of space on the desk,
but you know, I get a workout,
putting them back up on the shelf,
and they make me look smart when
I have that whole API reference.
So you really want this?
I really want it.
So she says you guys really want this.
Do you really want printed API reference?
Okay, okay, I guess we can do that.
Heather Whoa!
Matt So, it's my pleasure to
announce that we will,
in fact,
have hard copy API reference for Cocoa,
Foundation and AppKit,
both Java and Objective-C,
available this summer in
print-on-demand online.
So, look for an ADC announcement
of this sometime this summer
when we've got Jaguar Final,
all of the APIs complete for it,
and you'll have these big old homes
on your desk that you can access.
Heather Woo!
I had no idea that he was going
to announce that whatsoever.
No idea.
Okay, so we've shared a lot
of information today.
Compared to last year,
we have tons of more
information to provide to you
over the course of the week.
You all have it in your schedule,
but this is just a roadmap.
Please don't miss the 9
o'clock session tomorrow.
We're going to go into what's
new in the Cocoa frameworks.
And then from then on, API techniques,
scripting, controls and accessibility,
it goes on and on and on.
I'm very interested in speaking
with you on Friday at 5 o'clock.
I know, I know,
the last session of the conference.
But that way, I'm only going to get the
really important feedback.
I had that in mind when I planned this.
So 5 o'clock on Friday,
feedback forum for Cocoa.
This is me, H.
Hickman, at Apple.com.
If you don't catch me in the
hall during the conference,
please feel free to send me email.
I will not be reading it this week,
but shortly after,
I will get back in touch with you.
Sometimes, that's a bad thing.
And then for more information,
I'm very excited.
If you've picked up your bags
and looked at your coupons,
you see that everyone that's attending
the conference is getting from O'Reilly
the new building Cocoa applications,
a step-by-step guide.
I think that is absolutely amazing.
Please go pick it up,
share it with people when
you go back to your offices,
have them ordered off the O'Reilly site.
Great stuff.
Heather In addition to the
Cocoa developer documentation,
we also offer customer training.
We have an incredible group in our
training organization that's helped
me extensively over the past year,
and I appreciate their support.
They've done amazing work.
They're training our internal engineers.
If you and your company
are interested in training,
please go to train.apple.com where
you can get more information.
Have a great week!